DETERMINATION AND RESILIENCE
RAISING LEADERS IN A WAR-TORN COUNTRY
BY AIMEE W

Her due date was approaching. As a mother, there
are the normal feelings of anticipation, but for Naw
Plaw Htoo, her situation was far more unstable than
most. Her husband, a soldier with the Karen National
Liberation Army (KNLA), was stationed away from
home, and the presence of the oppressive Burma
Army constantly threatened her family’s safety. One
night, with her two- and three-year-old children in
tow, she fled her village under the cover of darkness.
As the Burma Army began burning homes behind
them, she felt the first pains of labor. Only about a
40-minute walk from her village, deep in the jungle,
she gave birth to a son; she named him Saw Sun. It
would be three years before she was reunited with
her husband again. Ten years later, she welcomed
another son, Toh.

Sitting with Naw Plaw Htoo and her son Toh, I am
struck by her humble confidence and quiet grace. For
her, the story of giving birth while fleeing for her life
is simply one chapter in a long journey of survival
and I sit in amazement at her strength. Now 80 years
old, she has lived nearly her entire life in the midst
of civil war. Surrounded by oppression and hardship,
she has remained resilient raising children, educating
youth, and guiding the next generation toward hope.

I first learned of Naw Plaw Htoo in the 2014 Day
of Prayer magazine, which featured two of our FBR
leaders. Saw Sun, nicknamed “Koala Bear,” was the
baby born in the jungle now a respected leader in
Karen State. Toh serves as the director of the Jungle
School of Medicine Kawthoolei. From the moment I
read their story, I was struck by the faith and perseverance
of the woman they call “Mom.” Her courage
stayed with me for many years, and in May 2025, I
was honored to meet her for the first time.

Born in Hsaw Hti Township in Karen State, Naw
Plaw Htoo was the middle of three children. When
she was three years old, her father, who had joined
the Karen resistance at the start of the Kawthoolei
revolution, died in battle. She attended school in her
village until grade 4, when the Burma Army burned
the entire village down. For years, she and her family
moved from place to place, hiding from conflict.

At age 15, she was finally able to continue her education
and completed grade 9. She dreamed of further
schooling, but experienced many setbacks. She pursued
Bible school and midwifery training, but after several
disappointments, she eventually joined her mother as a
village teacher. She taught for three years before marrying
unaware that this path would shape the futures of
countless young people.

As her children grew and instability continued, Naw
Plaw Htoo realized that educational opportunities in
their area were scarce. Following God’s calling, she returned
to teaching. “Everywhere I went, I taught,” she
said, “because if I did not teach, the children and my
children would not have the chance to go to school.
In the class, they were students and not my children.
At home, they were my children.” She mostly taught in
jungle classrooms, sometimes in simple shelters during
rainy seasons. Supplies were scarce; students used slates
because paper was unavailable. Occasionally, pens and
books were smuggled from Burma Army controlled areas.
With no textbooks, she relied on a simple syllabus
and created lessons from scratch. God strengthened her
through every season.

Many older villagers would say, “If we are educated or
not educated, we both eat rice.” But Naw Plaw Htoo remained
steadfast: “I want the children to be educated!”
She said, “I wanted to go to college, but I didn’t have a
chance, so I tried my best for my children so they could
go to college, work with other people, and do their work
well.” She doesn't know the number of students she
taught and shaped. She continued teaching well into
her 70s. Through every hardship, she saw God’s grace,
witnessing miracles and provision.

The educational foundation she laid for her own children
led them into lives of influence and service. Three
graduated from Bible school and became ministers. Saw
Sun and Toh continue to serve their people faithfully,
using their skills and compassion to help their people in
profound ways.

As I look at Naw Plaw Htoo, I am reminded that one
woman’s faith, determination, and sacrifice can change
generations and that God often begins His greatest
works through quiet lives surrendered to Him.

Please pray for:
• Teachers in Burma that they will have the training,
passion, and strength to pour into the next generation.
• “For the dictators that they will have peace and love
in their hearts, and especially that they will know God.”
— Naw Plaw Htoo
• “For peace, so that everyone can be free and peaceful.”
— Naw Plaw Htoo